---
date: 2013-12-23
title: "Language is an Implementation Detail"
tags:
- golang
form: story
story: hpc
storyIndex: 202
---


Although everything about working at HPC is interesting, last week was
quite peculiar on its own.

There was an interesting discussion about use of async pub-sub
messaging for communications between micro-services. That's what
[Fred George](http://vimeo.com/79866979) does, for example, with event
messages. However, command messages have their own value as well, due
to the behaviour that we associate with them (only one message handler
could deal with command messages, unlike event messages, where there
could be 0 or more).

Yet, after a bit of discussions with Tomas, we discovered that
introduction of command messaging breaks our nice decoupling with
regards to ease of upgrades, experimenting or continuous
delivery. Besides, if needed, you can always implement command messing
within the boundaries of the service. This is possible, since we place
a clear separation between high-level design decisions (the ones which
talk about how mServices should behave and communicate) and
implementation details (which govern how mServices should be actually
implemented).

For example, here are some high-level design decisions:

* Protocol for communications - JSON/HTML over HTTP in our case
* Messaging semantics - async pub/sub in our case
* Approaches for deployments, versioning them and experimenting with
    them - rapid iterations, A/B testing, using business metrics
    as the driver
* Set of recommended languages and technologies - still
    evaluating (see below)
* Design and development priorities - creating fun environment
    to work in, keeping things real, small and simple
* Execution and hosting constraints - Linux, clustered in our
    own DC with geo-replication
* Additional constraints - low latency and failure-tolerant

Curiously enough, we are still iterating through the suitable
languages for implementing new version of HPC (while also addressing
the design and domain questions). So for this week I'm going to
spend more time learning Haskell (in addition to doing dives into
Erlang and Golang during the previous weeks).

At the same point, our rewrite will probably start in .NET with
micro-services design. Reason for that being - .NET, despite it's
shortcomings and costs is the language where we all would be most
productive and could release initial versions fast. This is crucial
for gaining real-world feedback for evolving the system.


> By the way, if you listen to Fred George, he mentions that at one
> point 150000 lines of Java code where rewritten in 4000 lines of
> Closure code (or so). Based on my exposure to Haskell so far,
> I'd say that C# is almost as verbose as Java in this sense.

Then, as the need arises, micro-services will be rewritten in one of
more Linux-friendly functional languages to:

* Save on licensing costs.
* Improve performance and reduce latency.
* Make code more simple and concise.
* Stand on the shoulders of giants, reusing ecosystem and communities
    of languages we choose.


In other words, languages are treated just like implementation details
of the system. Even though there are some recommendations and
guidelines, developers should be able to choose the tool they want in
order to get the job done in the most efficient way.
