---
date: 2014-09-29
title: Reactive User Experience
tags:
- web
- event-driven
form: story
story: hpc
storyIndex: 244
---


Last week I focused on implementing some requirements related to
reactive user experience. That is basically about things that make the
users feel as if they were working with a native desktop/mobile
application.


First, **menu items in the web interface should highlight as soon as a
user gets new information** that he hasn't viewed yet (news items,
alerts, chat messages). That's much like Facebook experience.

Implementing this relatively simple feature was hard in our previous
iteration over the User Interface, since we had no notion of events
and view life-cycle. Switching to components that communicate through
events makes everything simpler in our current iteration.

It is currently implemented via 2 components:

1. `Poller` component, which runs on the client-side. While the user
is logged-in, it publishes events about feed changes as soon as they
are retrieved from the server (delivered via the long-polling, would
probably switch to sockets.io later).

2. `Navbar` component, which renders status in HTML during server-side
rendering (happens on first page load or in case where we don't have
push-state) and then subscribes to feed change events on the
client-side. Whenever status changes, CSS class of a DOM element is
changed accordingly.

In case, when user has JavaScript and push-state enabled, there will
be only one instance of `navbar` and `poller` running in his browser
tab, no matter how many pages he visits.

Second, **menu highlights should persist when you travel between the
pages**. There shouldn't be even flickering. This is solved by
client-side rendering over Backbone.

Third, **news feed and alerts feed should reactively display "You've got
new messages"** whenever there are new things to read. That is very
similar to what Twitter does.

Once, I had the `poller` component, it was trivial to implement this
feature. Feed views simply subscribe to `poller` events on
rendering. Whenever there are new items - we `show` message
box. Whenever a view is removed from the DOM, we detach all event
listeners and avoid memory leaks.

After getting this simple reactivity straight, I started working on
the chat. That's what I'll be working on this week.

_Pieter_ and _Tomas_ were working mainly on the `Profile` view,
focusing on component reusability (e.g. `like` and `flirt`
buttons). In parallel, _Tomas_ was working with `like` feature that
was recently introduced into the existing version of HPC1 across all
the countries.
