---
date: 2014-02-08
title: "Evolving the Stack and learning Nanomsg"
tags:
- nosql
- golang
- messaging
form: story
story: hpc
storyIndex: 205
---


Last week with HappyPancake was my first full-time week with the
team. Time **flew fast and left me wishing for more**.

I explored [nanomsg](http://nanomsg.org/) (glorified sockets) and how
it is used in golang. nanomsg is going to be our communication layer
between components within the app, hence understanding its usage
patterns was important. It was extremely exciting to pair with Pieter
on go programming exercises (and also picking up some Sublime/Linux
tricks along the way).

While developing my first golang+nanomsg+FDB prototype, I was quite
proud of the first code that was written. It was relatively robust,
simple and somewhat performant. During a few next days I realised that
it was actually an overcomplicated and under performing piece of
software. Pieter shared his process about structuring and expressing
ideas in golang. Tomas explained how to make that code brutally simple
and yet more performant. That was awesome! Previously it would take me
years or months before I could arrive to that breath-taking
understanding of how stupid I were. **With this team everything
happens so much faster**. Love it.

During the week we set ourselves a goal of building a system which
could return uncached reads from the front (reverse proxy) within
**25ms under the load of 50000 HTTP requests per second** , while
degrading gracefully under increased load. This, assuming that we run
3 relatively small app servers, 2 reverse proxies and FDB cluster of 5
nodes. Obviously, throwing more hardware to the system, should scale
it out. It is nice to be working on a system, where **latency is one
of the design constraints and having fun is another one**.

When I had to leave on Friday evening, Tomas and Pieter were
discussing process of **getting rid of state in services** by pushing
it all the way to reverse-proxy (using Lua on nginx to take care of
HTTP connections, while preserving true stateless asynchrony over
nanomsg on the inside). This approach has a synergy with building
resilient system of small systems (aka micro-services architecture)
communicating over asynchronous events and continuously evolving
(versioning, A/B testing and continuous delivery are among the goals
of the goals).

Apparently, during the course of the evening, they refined the
approach to make it even more simple and robust. I can't wait to
see what this idea has turned into.

By the way,
[FoundationDB just hit 2.0 version](https://foundationdb.com/blog/version-2-0-is-here-php-golang-directory-layer-tls-security-and-more). They
published a golang client library within that release, making use of
FDB &#8211; a breeze. By the way, as Pieter and Tomas reported,
upgrading our test cluster to v2.0 took 4 minutes. ETCD was also
bumped to [0.3.0](https://coreos.com/blog/etcd-0.3.0-released/).
