---
date: 2014-10-07
title: Feeds, Chat, Online list and CSS
tags:
- web
form: story
story: hpc
storyIndex: 246
---

Last week I **focused on the user interface**, rebuilding features
from the first UI demo. This time the code was much better, though:

* all benefits of LazoJS framework are built-in;
* less memory leaks and unexpected behavior (last UI prototype stuck
there), for example all views explicitly unsubscribe event handlers
before being unloaded from the DOM;
* more reactivity and interactivity across the system.

Long story short, I implemented/polished:

* **diary, news, alerts feeds are now more polished**, have same
_endless scroll_ behavior;
* **message inbox and conversation views are now implemented and are working reactively**;
* all feed-based views have **consistent ad display** (which works for
items retrieved from the server on the first page load and items added
reactively);
* there is a new _online list_ view, which displays last active
members on the site; it acts as a roulette, never showing the same
member twice within the session; the list is updated with a new photo
once every 10 seconds.


During the week _Tomas_ introduced me to the articles on
[CSS Architecture](http://philipwalton.com/articles/css-architecture/). They
describe how to design CSS classes and align them with HTML code in
order to create web applications that are scalable (people-wise) and
maintainable. Suddenly, HTML side started making a lot more sense to
me - there is a lot of design process involved there.

At the end of the week I went through all of my client-side code,
refactoring HTML, CSS and JavaScript to a better design (previously
there was no design at all). This way, _Tomas_ will have less work to
do, when he starts applying nice UI look to our system.

_Pieter_ and _Tomas_ focused on implementing **proper component reuse
at Lazo level in the profile page**. For example, _like_ button is a
reusable component which could appear multiple times on a single
page. Their plan is to try and apply this approach to a collection
views this week (e.g. news or diary feed).

This week I'm working from Italy (Bologna). I have a bunch of
**outstanding tickets regarding UI features I implemented**, so that's
what I'll focus on. We are getting close to another demo and a release
in Norway.
