---
date: 2014-02-24
title: Containers, virtualization and clusters
tags:
- cloud
- containers
form: story
story: hpc
storyIndex: 207
---

Last week was a bit hectic. We are waiting for a bunch of datacenters
to provide us with the test access to virtualised and hardware
servers. These have to be benchmarked in order to see how they
perform.

Some time during the week we realised two things:

* We aren't going to get decent numbers out of the machines on
    DigitalOcean
* Apparently DigitalOcean is using some cheap virtualisation
    environment which massively underperforms compared to VMWare

This realisation lead us to the point where we started evaluating
dedicated hardware option instead of the VMs. We are going to run
Docker containers in them anyway, so there is not going to be any
vendor or hardware lock-in. Here are a few notes on that:

*   Dedicated hardware is fast
* Good virtualisation software adds little overhead on top of HW; bad
    virtualisation - kills any performance
* Docker containers add very little overhead (should be way below 10%
    in our scenario) but help a lot with software compartmentalisation

Within the last week I was following the footsteps of Pieter, learning
from him and writing my first docker containers. There are a few
gotchas, but the entire concept is amazing! It is probably the best IT
thing that happened to me since beer. It solves "works on my
machine" syndrome in most of the cases, making it extremely easy
to work with software both locally and in remote environments. The
experience is a lot better than Lokad.CQRS abstractions for file and
Azure backends that I came up with earlier.

Eventually, while setting up the containers over and over again, we
came to the conclusion that we want to automate the entire
thing. Running a script to deploy new versions requires context
switching which Tomas and Pieter don't like (I never been as
productive in Linux as these guys, but I start feeling this
too). Hence, we are thinking about using either
[Drone](https://drone.io/) or [fleet](https://github.com/coreos/fleet)
to deploy and manage containers across the cluster.

We will probably be using ubuntu 12.04 LTS for the containers
(long-term support and stable code). Trying something like
[CoreOS](https://coreos.com/) for the host OS seems compelling because
it is native to etcd (awesome) and fleet.

We'll see how it goes. This week is going to be about strengthening
our continuous delivery story and getting more numbers from the stack
in different configurations.

A few more other highlights from the previous week:

* We switched to Slack from campfire (it is used for persisted chats
    between the team). Native client is awesome, works so much better
    than campfire and Skype group chats
* [wrk](https://github.com/wg/wrk) is an awesome tool for doing load
    testing while measuring throughput and latencies
