---
date: 2014-06-09
title: Almost Demo
tags:
- devops
- dev-process
form: story
story: hpc
storyIndex: 217
---

## The error of my ways

We are getting closer to the demo date, which is scheduled to be next
Monday, and **I did a big mistake last week**. Instead of thinking for
the whole team I focused only on the design and backend development.

It would've been better if instead I tried to go out and unload some
burden from _Tomas_, who was swamped with the other things this
week. This way we could've avoided over-delivering on the back-end
while getting behind the schedule on the UI design (which is usually
the most visible and tangible part of any product).

I'll try to pick up more skills in HTML+CSS and UI design in the
upcoming days to have skills spread more evenly across our small team.

## Features delivered

During the last week I added **continuous integration** server (using
Drone on a VM) and introduced a **shared staging server** which could
be used for demo.

![Drone IO](/images/drone.png)

That server also has infrastructure for capturing various metrics from
our application code, aggregating them and pushing to a nice dashboard
UI.

![Librato](/images/librato.png)

I introduced `nav` package responsible for maintaining navigation menu
at the top of the page. Some items on that menu are highlighted in
real-time, as new things arrive for the user to check out. Newly
registered users now have a newsfeed that is pre-filled with
interesting things to check out (as determined by our matching
logic). Plus, now it is possible to see photos in the profile pages,
like them and send flirts.

Ability to `register` is something _Pieter_ delivered this week, along
with draft implementation of `review` service. He also came up with a
really nice implementation for our `online` service, responsible for
maintaining a list of currently active users across the cluster.


## Retrospective


At this point, we have a working pre-alpha version with core
functionality either implemented or envisioned in detail. **We didn't
burden the code with any performance optimizations**, keeping it simple
and capable of fast evolution.

> Performance optimizations, if introduced to immature software
> design, could hinder or prevent its growth to maturity.

Technically, the **implementation is extremely simple: a single
executable application written in golang with mySQL persistence and
in-memory bus**. It exposes **HTTP endpoint** serving web pages and
could be switched to **clustered mode** (if put behind load balancer
and plugged to a proper messaging platform).

This implementation is more developed from the design perspective : it
is **decomposed into simple golang packages which are designed to work
together to deliver use cases of a dating web-site**. These packages
tend to be small - merely ~300-400 lines of code on average, including
HTML templates). Majority of these packages are full vertical slices,
encapsulating implementation details starting from the storage model
and up to HTML rendering details within the http handlers.

**Concepts within the code map to the domain model rather well**. They
are quite focused and simple, thanks to hours spent working over them
with Pieter.

However, **vocabulary could benefit from a better alignment with the
business model**. As _Tomas_ mentioned, we managed to drift from
original domain model during the development process. That is
something we could fix after the demo.

These design concepts are very prominent in the **contracts of
packages: published events and exposed services**. There are quite a
few of DDD Value objects as well.

Design approach still seems to hold pretty well, although we are
getting close to the next strain point: some packages get too
complicated and would benefit from better tests at the contract
level. Something like event-driven given-when-then specifications
could work really well here. Adding such tests is something I'm
looking forward to after the demo as well.
