---
date: 2014-05-12
title: Emergent Design Faces Reality
tags:
- design
- golang
- ddd
form: story
story: hpc
storyIndex: 215
---


Last two weeks were packed. We are working hard to have a limited
prototype of the application ready and available for a demo in
June. So far things look really good for the schedule!

## Collaborative design process

We chat frequently with _Pieter_, discussing things small and big:
starting from component design to a naming choice of some variable or
just a weird gut feeling about some code.

I found out that disagreements with Pieter are especially productive
and exciting. I’m really glad that he has patience to put through with
my stupid questions.

**Here is one example**.

A few days ago _Pieter_ started working on profile functionality and
began introducing there PhotoUrl fields. That immediately gave me the
big shivers, since I considered this to be a misleading
design. Profile service was responsible for managing and providing
published user information like gender, birthday or name. Photo urls
have got to be a different concern! Bleeding them into the component
responsible for creating and providing profile info felt like an
over-complication, compared to the other components (they are clean
and focused).

I tried to explain these reasons to _Pieter_, but that didn’t get us
far. He replied that it was ok to denormalize and mock some data
within the profile service, since it would help him to get the profile
viewing page faster. In response I tried to suggest to create mock
stubs for photo urls in a dedicated photo component.

This went on for a while. Looking at the code together through
ScreenHero didn’t help much either.

Some progress started only when we started talking about things in
terms “this gives me shivers”, while trying to understand why each
other sees things differently.

As it turned out, we had different perspectives on decomposition of
the components. I had in mind purely vertical responsibility for the
profile component, where it would have all layers of an N-layered app
along with full responsibilities : creating data, persisting it
locally, publishing events, providing HTTP handler for the UX. All
that, while focusing on a small and coherent set of behaviors around
public user profiles.

At the same time _Pieter_ was working with the UX. He was interested
in a design decomposition which would give him the component that
would focus only on maintaining a cache of all user-related
information for the purpose of serving profile pages and providing
that information to the other components. That component would have a
lot of data, but it would not contain any complex business rules
- mostly event subscriptions and denormalized read models.

Seeing this difference was a huge step. I also needed that component
(e.g. when you have a news feed and need to enrich entries in it with
beautiful profile photos along with name, gender and age for each
user). However, since I wasn’t aware of such distinction in our
domain, I actually misused a bunch of components for this purpose.

While flushing out boundaries and contracts of this new profile
component we also touched it’s interactions with the future
components, which are not even available in the current code (e.g.:
review and draft). We talked about naming, responsibilities, contracts
- all things except for the implementation (which would be
trivial at that point). We even made explicit things like :

> Ok, so we don’t have draft and review components in our codebase
> this week, however we will pretend that they exist by manually
> publishing events from them in our ‘prepopulateDB’ script. Since the
> other components subscribe to these events, they will not even
> notice any change when we introduce actual implementations. And
> since we model events from the perspective of the consumers, they
> will be useful.

A better and more clear design emerged through this process, things
clicking into the place like pieces of a puzzle.

I find this process truly astonishing : you **use codebase to drive
exploration of the domain and also capture a deeper insight** that is
obtained during that process. **Emerging design is a beautiful
side-effect of that process**.

## Design constraints

**Such process would not be possible without the design constraints**
  which fuel and direct creativity. Here are a few that are important
  in our case:

* **Distributed development team of three people**, working remotely
    on the same codebase in a single github repository;
* **mentality of golang**, which forces us to think in terms of tiny
    packages with short and clear names;
* requirement to **have a demo version in June and a working Beta in
    September**;
* **shared belief in the power of simplicity**;
* high performance and scalability requirements, which we **must not
    **optimize for right now (since that put us behind the schedule
    for the June demo).

## Optimize for future performance

I find it particularly interesting to optimize design for future
performance optimizations, while consciously writing code that is
designed for short-term evolvability (and hence is hacky and
slow). This forces you to think about isolating this hacky code,
preparing it for future replacement and possible optimization
strategies.

It is almost as if that non-existent better code was written behind
the lines and continuously evolved every time you touch the component
or think about it. It is impossible to forget about that, since actual
code is so inefficient, just like the caterpillar.

After a few iterations you end up with the component that is designed:

*   to have high evolvability in the short term
* to be optimized in the longer term, making a bunch of strategies
    available (starting from a denormalized read model up to a
    in-memory cache across all nodes in the cluster, invalidated by
    messages).

## Making it all real

All this process is not only fun, but it also tightly tied to the real
world. _Tomas_ makes sure of that. First of all, he acts as the domain
expert and the stakeholder in the product, setting constraints and
priorities, sharing insight. He also works on the vision of the
product from the user perspective, capturing concepts in a tangible
form of HTML templates which we started merging into the codebase.

These HTML templates started showing up a few ago. They made _Pieter_
and me feel as if New Year came early this year:

* it is awesome to see a real product instead of hacky UI;
* UX easily communicates important requirements that could be missed
    otherwise (e.g. “gender” symbol and “is online” highlight for
    every author in the newsfeed entry).

## In the end

We keep saying: "let's see how much our approach will hold before it
becomes a problem", however so far it holds up pretty
well. Architecture, technology and other irrelevant implementation
details have changed more than once during this period (e.g.: during
the last weeks we switched from FDB to CRUD with shared transactions
to event-driven CRUD (no event-sourcing, though). Design still
supports growth of understanding and product through these minor
perturbations.
